Nostr Double Ratchet (#1813)
nostr-protocol/nips: 117.md

# NIP-117

## The Double Ratchet Algorithm

The Double Ratchet is a key rotation algorithm for secure private messaging.

> It allows us to 1) communicate on Nostr without revealing metadata (who you are communicating with and when), and 2) keep your message history and future messages safe even if your main Nostr key is compromised.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It allows us to 1) communicate on Nostr without revealing the receiver of each message, and 2) keep your message history and future messages safe even if your main Nostr key is compromised.
```
NIP-17 already hides the sender and the date/time

Additionally, it enables disappearing messages that become undecryptable when past message decryption keys are discarded after use.

See also: [NIP-118](./118.md): Nostr Double Ratchet Invites

### Overview

"Double ratchet" means we use 2 "ratchets": cryptographic functions that can be rotated forward, but not backward: current keys can be used to derive next keys, but not the other way around.

Ratchet 1 uses Diffie-Hellman (DH) shared secrets and is rotated each time the other participant acknowledges a new key we have sent along with a previous message.

Ratchet 2 generates encryption keys for each message. It rotates after every message, using the previous message's key as input (and the Ratchet 1 key when it rotates). This process ensures forward secrecy for consecutive messages from the same sender in between Ratchet 1 rotations.

## Nostr implementation

We implement the Double Ratchet Algorithm on Nostr similarly to Signal's [Double Ratchet with header encryption](https://signal.org/docs/specifications/doubleratchet/#double-ratchet-with-header-encryption), but encrypting the message headers with [NIP-44](./44.md) conversation keys instead of symmetric header keys.

> Ratchet 1 keys are standard Nostr keys. In addition to encryption, they are also used for publishing and subscribing to messages on Nostr. As they are rotated and not linked to public Nostr identities, metadata privacy is preserved.

Reviewer: What do you mean by `subscripting to`? Which keys should be used to download kind 1060's from the relay? Should clients just list all rotated keys from the ratchet to download each message? Doesn't this let the relay know all the keys for a given section? Also, should we AUTH into relays? Because that would connect the ratchet keys with the nostr pubkey of the user and from there all the metadata can be found. The relay just need to publish keys they have seen from time to time.

## Nostr event format

### Message

#### Outer event

```typescript
{
  kind: 1060,
  content: encryptedInnerEvent,
  tags: [["header", encryptedHeader]],

>   pubkey: ratchetPublicKey,

Reviewer: Which ratchet is this key from, 1 or 2?

>   created_at,

Reviewer: Does this event also randomizes time to avoid time-collision attacks, like on NIP-17?

Otherwise, couldn't an attacker figure out the two keys talking to one another by looking at the create_at sets?

  id,
  sig
}
```

We subscribe to Double Ratchet events based on author public keys which are ephemeral — not used for other purposes than the Double Ratchet session. We use the regular event kind `1060` to differentiate it from other DM kinds, retrieval of which may be restricted by relays.

> The encrypted header contains our next nostr public key, our previous sending chain length and the current message number.

Reviewer: What happens if users miss a message (like the relay deleted it or the sending process failed) and you don't know what is the next pubkey?

> The events should be sent to the recipient's inbox relays.

Reviewer: Shouldn't this use the DM relays? Otherwise, if I am the only user of my public inbox, it's possible to identify DMs sent to me there.

#### Inner event

> Inner events must be [NIP-59](https://github.com/nostr-protocol/nips/blob/master/59.md) Rumors (unsigned Nostr events) allowing plausible deniability.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Inner events must be [NIP-59](59.md) Rumors (unsigned Nostr events) allowing plausible deniability.
```

With established Nostr event kinds, clients can implement all kinds of features, such as replies, reactions, and encrypted file sharing in private messages.

> Direct message and encrypted file messages are defined in [NIP-17](17.md).

Reviewer: Does it allow groups with the multiple p-tags from NIP-17?

## Algorithm

Signal's [Double Ratchet with header encryption](https://signal.org/docs/specifications/doubleratchet/#double-ratchet-with-header-encryption) document is a comprehensive description and explanation of the algorithm.

In this NIP, the algorithm is only described in code, in order to highlight differences to the Signal implementation.

### External functions

> We use the following Nostr functions ([NIP-01](https://github.com/nostr-protocol/nips/blob/master/01.md)):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We use the following Nostr functions ([NIP-01](01.md)):
```

- `generateSecretKey()` for creating Nostr private keys
- `finalizeEvent(partialEvent, secretKey)` for creating valid Nostr events with pubkey, id and signature

> We use [NIP-44](https://github.com/nostr-protocol/nips/blob/master/44.md) functions for encryption:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We use [NIP-44](44.md) functions for encryption:
```

- `nip44.encrypt`
- `nip44.decrypt`
- `nip44.getConversationKey`

> [NIP-59](https://github.com/nostr-protocol/nips/blob/master/59.md):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[NIP-59](59.md):
```

    },
    ourNextNostrKey: {
      publicKey: getPublicKey(ourNextPrivateKey),
      privateKey: ourNextPrivateKey,
    },
    receivingChainKey: undefined,
    sendingChainKey,
    sendingChainMessageNumber: 0,
    receivingChainMessageNumber: 0,
    previousSendingChainMessageCount: 0,
    skippedKeys: {},
  };
}

// Bob is the recipient of the first message
function initBob(
  theirNextNostrPublicKey: string,
  ourCurrentPrivateKey: Uint8Array,
  sharedSecret: Uint8Array
): SessionState {
  return {
    rootKey: sharedSecret, // Bob starts with the shared secret as root key
    theirNextNostrPublicKey,
    ourCurrentNostrKey: undefined, // Bob has no current key yet
    ourNextNostrKey: {
      publicKey: getPublicKey(ourCurrentPrivateKey),
      privateKey: ourCurrentPrivateKey,
    },
    receivingChainKey: undefined,
    sendingChainKey: undefined, // Bob hasn't sent anything yet
    sendingChainMessageNumber: 0,
    receivingChainMessageNumber: 0,
    previousSendingChainMessageCount: 0,
    skippedKeys: {},
  };
}
```

### Sending messages

```typescript
sendEvent(event: Partial<UnsignedEvent>) {
  const innerEvent = nip59.createRumor(event)

>   const [header, encryptedData] = this.ratchetEncrypt(JSON.stringify(rumor));

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  const [header, encryptedData] = this.ratchetEncrypt(JSON.stringify(innerEvent));
```
